README.md, before:

# SpiralFullFusion Toy

A single-file, NumPy-only mad science lab where a reliability-obsessed teacher and a rank-clipped student co-evolve under RAG jolts, variance-forged temperatures, and hazard-triggered capacity flips. Tiny, loud, and hell-bent on stress-testing calibration hacks in the smallest loop we could get away with.

## Why it’s interesting (and experimental)
- **Reliability cult leader**: multi-head signals are fused with Bayesian precision, dominance meters, and layer hazard to decide when to prune, poke, or unleash exploration.
- **RAG with receipts**: bCSR top-m biasing hauls in SHAP-ish attributions and per-source decay—retrieval hints must prove their worth or get throttled to oblivion.
- **Temperature as feedback control**: temperatures are carved out of variance and can backprop through Σ, letting calibration gradients melt back into the student’s parameters.
- **Compact on purpose**: zero external data, only NumPy, and a shared rank projection between teacher and student—small enough to grok, weird enough to grin.
- **Python-gonzo loop**: hand-rolled autograd-ish blocks, rank-k attention, uncertainty-tuned learning rates, and per-layer keep_k mutators—no frameworks, just raw NumPy chaos.

## How the spiral mutates
1. **Spin up toy text**: sculpt a structured bigram world and sample short contexts.
2. **Teach with reliability**: fuse heads, log dominance/reliability, inject RAG deltas, and damp sketchy sources via decay.
3. **Distill into the student**: mirror the shared rank matrix, train rank-k attention blocks, and nudge per-layer `keep_k` using hazard pulses.
4. **Close the loop**: derive temperatures from variance; mix CE + KL (distillation) with optional dT/dΣ backprop; watch CE, KL, ECE, T, hazard, and LR/keep_k dance every few steps.

## Run it
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py
```

You’ll get a brisk training run that paints the loop: generate → reliability + RAG audit → distill → temperature feedback → repeat. It’s a pocket-sized, proudly experimental demo of reliability-aware distillation with retrieval twists.

## New tricks: save/load + decoder
- **Checkpoint everything**: tokenizer, teacher (including reliability trackers and RAG weights), student, and shared projection are all packed into a single `.npz` via `save_weights`.
- **Resume or just decode**: `--load_path` restores a checkpoint; set `--steps 0` to skip training and jump straight to inference.
- **Seeded nucleus sampling**: control stochastic decoding with `--rng_seed`, `--temperature`, `--top_p`, and optional `--top_k`, generating text (if tokenizer present) or raw token IDs.
- **Custom data or text**: point `--data_path` at a NumPy token array, or `--text_path` at UTF-8 text to train the built-in byte-level tokenizer (configurable with `--tok_*` flags).
- **Reproducible spins**: use `--seed` to set the base seed for synthetic bigram data and initial weights when starting fresh.
- **Memory traces per token**: enable `--mem_trace` to print a per-step breakdown of episodic memory influence: top neighbors (similarity/weight/strength/usage), their per-token Δlogit pushes, aggregated boosts, and whether the chosen token was helped by memory. Tune verbosity with `--mem_trace_neighbors`, `--mem_trace_tokens`, and silence empty retrievals via `--mem_trace_only_used`. Override memory logit scaling during generation with `--mem_scale`.
- **Heatmap “X-ray” mode**: pair `--mem_trace` with `--mem_heatmap` to stream a rolling matplotlib heatmap of memory-driven Δlogits across the last 200 generation steps (configurable via `--mem_heatmap_top`/`--mem_heatmap_steps`).
- **Self-dialogue taps the teacher**: when the student is uncertain, `--self_dialog` runs a one-off teacher forward pass and injects its top tokens back into the logits (scaled by uncertainty). Tune with `--self_dialog_margin`, `--self_dialog_entropy`, `--self_dialog_top`, and `--self_dialog_alpha`.
- **Hazard bandit**: flip `--hazard_bandit` to let a per-layer two-armed bandit pick safe vs. risky modes (keep_k / LR deltas) with survival bonuses and spike penalties. Adjust deltas and thresholds via the `--bandit_*` flags.
- **Meta-Sleep attention**: the rank-k attention layers now track meta statistics of keys (EMA mean/var + Oja PCA) and can slowly integrate “sleep” memories with whitening and shrinkage. Enable with `StudentCfg.meta_sleep.enable` in code to experiment with delayed consolidation.

## Usage samples
Train from scratch and save:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 200 --batch 16 --ctx_len 8 --save_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz --seed 7
```

Train on your text (tokenizer auto-trained), then decode:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --text_path my_corpus.txt --tok_vocab 512 --steps 300 --save_path /tmp/spiral_text.npz
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_text.npz --prompt "hello spiral" --max_new_tokens 32 --rng_seed 123
```

Decode from a saved checkpoint using token IDs:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz --prompt "1,2,3" --max_new_tokens 24 --temperature 1.1 --top_p 0.9
```

Trace memory influence during decoding (text prompt):
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz \
  --prompt "hello" --max_new_tokens 20 --mem_trace \
  --mem_trace_neighbors 3 --mem_trace_tokens 5
```

Only show traces when a retrieval actually fires, and scale memory boosts:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz \
  --prompt "hello" --max_new_tokens 20 --mem_trace --mem_trace_only_used \
  --mem_scale 2.5
```

Watch the “X-ray” heatmap and let the student query the teacher when unsure:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz \
  --prompt "hello spiral" --max_new_tokens 40 \
  --mem_trace --mem_heatmap --mem_heatmap_top 24 \
  --self_dialog --self_dialog_margin 0.05 --self_dialog_alpha 2.0
```

Inject hazard-bandit exploration into training:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 200 --batch 16 --ctx_len 8 \
  --hazard_bandit --bandit_keepk_risky 3 --bandit_rho_risky -0.3 \
  --save_path /tmp/spiral_bandit.npz
```

### Toy-friendly defaults
- For the cleanest toy behavior, keep `--V 256`, `--tok_vocab 256`, and `--r 64` so the synthetic bigram world and rank head stay aligned.

Commit message:

Fix SpiralV9 method nesting and checkpoints

README.md, after:

# SpiralFullFusion Toy

A single-file, NumPy-only mad science lab where a reliability-obsessed teacher and a rank-clipped student co-evolve under RAG jolts, variance-forged temperatures, and hazard-triggered capacity flips. Tiny, loud, and hell-bent on stress-testing calibration hacks in the smallest loop we could get away with.

## Why it’s interesting (and experimental)
- **Reliability cult leader**: multi-head signals are fused with Bayesian precision, dominance meters, and layer hazard to decide when to prune, poke, or unleash exploration.
- **RAG with receipts**: bCSR top-m biasing hauls in SHAP-ish attributions and per-source decay—retrieval hints must prove their worth or get throttled to oblivion.
- **Temperature as feedback control**: temperatures are carved out of variance and can backprop through Σ, letting calibration gradients melt back into the student’s parameters.
- **Compact on purpose**: zero external data, only NumPy, and a shared rank projection between teacher and student—small enough to grok, weird enough to grin.
- **Python-gonzo loop**: hand-rolled autograd-ish blocks, rank-k attention, uncertainty-tuned learning rates, and per-layer keep_k mutators—no frameworks, just raw NumPy chaos.

## How the spiral mutates
1. **Spin up toy text**: sculpt a structured bigram world and sample short contexts.
2. **Teach with reliability**: fuse heads, log dominance/reliability, inject RAG deltas, and damp sketchy sources via decay.
3. **Distill into the student**: mirror the shared rank matrix, train rank-k attention blocks, and nudge per-layer `keep_k` using hazard pulses.
4. **Close the loop**: derive temperatures from variance; mix CE + KL (distillation) with optional dT/dΣ backprop; watch CE, KL, ECE, T, hazard, and LR/keep_k dance every few steps.

## Run it
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py
```

You’ll get a brisk training run that paints the loop: generate → reliability + RAG audit → distill → temperature feedback → repeat. It’s a pocket-sized, proudly experimental demo of reliability-aware distillation with retrieval twists.

## New tricks: save/load + decoder
- **Checkpoint everything**: tokenizer, teacher (including reliability trackers and RAG weights), student, and shared projection are all packed into a single `.npz` via `save_weights`.
- **Resume or just decode**: `--load_path` restores a checkpoint; set `--steps 0` to skip training and jump straight to inference.
- **Seeded nucleus sampling**: control stochastic decoding with `--rng_seed`, `--temperature`, `--top_p`, and optional `--top_k`, generating text (if tokenizer present) or raw token IDs.
- **Custom data or text**: point `--data_path` at a NumPy token array, or `--text_path`/`--text_paths` at UTF-8 text (supports globs + multiple files) to train the built-in byte-level tokenizer (configurable with `--tok_*` flags).
- **Reproducible spins**: use `--seed` to set the base seed for synthetic bigram data and initial weights when starting fresh.
- **Memory traces per token**: enable `--mem_trace` to print a per-step breakdown of episodic memory influence: top neighbors (similarity/weight/strength/usage), their per-token Δlogit pushes, aggregated boosts, and whether the chosen token was helped by memory. Tune verbosity with `--mem_trace_neighbors`, `--mem_trace_tokens`, and silence empty retrievals via `--mem_trace_only_used`. Override memory logit scaling during generation with `--mem_scale`.
- **Heatmap “X-ray” mode**: pair `--mem_trace` with `--mem_heatmap` to stream a rolling matplotlib heatmap of memory-driven Δlogits across the last 200 generation steps (configurable via `--mem_heatmap_top`/`--mem_heatmap_steps`).
- **Self-dialogue taps the teacher**: when the student is uncertain, `--self_dialog` runs a one-off teacher forward pass and injects its top tokens back into the logits (scaled by uncertainty). Tune with `--self_dialog_margin`, `--self_dialog_entropy`, `--self_dialog_top`, and `--self_dialog_alpha`.
- **Hazard bandit**: flip `--hazard_bandit` to let a per-layer two-armed bandit pick safe vs. risky modes (keep_k / LR deltas) with survival bonuses and spike penalties. Adjust deltas and thresholds via the `--bandit_*` flags.
- **Galois controller**: enable Padé/Floquet hazard control for `T0`/`rag_weight`/`keep_k` updates; use `--galois_disable` to turn it off or `--galois_every` to tune cadence.
- **Strict matmul debugging**: use `--strict_matmul` to disable NaN/Inf scrubbing in `safe_matmul` and surface numerical issues.
- **Checkpointing**: use `--ckpt_dir` with `--save_every` to auto-save training snapshots, `--resume` to load the latest, and `--keep_last` to prune older checkpoints. Add `--resume_strict_matmul` to restore the strict-matmul flag from the checkpoint.
- **Meta-Sleep attention**: the rank-k attention layers now track meta statistics of keys (EMA mean/var + Oja PCA) and can slowly integrate “sleep” memories with whitening and shrinkage. Enable with `StudentCfg.meta_sleep.enable` in code to experiment with delayed consolidation.

## Usage samples
Train from scratch and save:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 200 --batch 16 --ctx_len 8 --save_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz --seed 7
```

Train on your text (tokenizer auto-trained), then decode:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --text_path my_corpus.txt --tok_vocab 512 --steps 300 --save_path /tmp/spiral_text.npz
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_text.npz --prompt "hello spiral" --max_new_tokens 32 --rng_seed 123
```

Train on multiple text files (globs allowed):
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --text_paths "./data/*.txt" "./more_corpus.txt" --tok_vocab 512 --steps 300
```

Decode from a saved checkpoint using token IDs:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz --prompt "1,2,3" --max_new_tokens 24 --temperature 1.1 --top_p 0.9
```

Trace memory influence during decoding (text prompt):
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz \
  --prompt "hello" --max_new_tokens 20 --mem_trace \
  --mem_trace_neighbors 3 --mem_trace_tokens 5
```

Only show traces when a retrieval actually fires, and scale memory boosts:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz \
  --prompt "hello" --max_new_tokens 20 --mem_trace --mem_trace_only_used \
  --mem_scale 2.5
```

Watch the “X-ray” heatmap and let the student query the teacher when unsure:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 0 --load_path /tmp/spiral_demo.npz \
  --prompt "hello spiral" --max_new_tokens 40 \
  --mem_trace --mem_heatmap --mem_heatmap_top 24 \
  --self_dialog --self_dialog_margin 0.05 --self_dialog_alpha 2.0
```

Inject hazard-bandit exploration into training:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 200 --batch 16 --ctx_len 8 \
  --hazard_bandit --bandit_keepk_risky 3 --bandit_rho_risky -0.3 \
  --save_path /tmp/spiral_bandit.npz
```

Checkpoint every 50 steps and resume:
```bash
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 400 --ckpt_dir ./ckpt --save_every 50
python SpiralFullFusion_toy.py --steps 400 --ckpt_dir ./ckpt --resume
```

### Toy-friendly defaults
- For the cleanest toy behavior, keep `--V 256`, `--tok_vocab 256`, and `--r 64` so the synthetic bigram world and rank head stay aligned.
